# BEAUTY AND/AS THEOLOGY: THE THEOLOGICAL AESTHETICS OF HANS URS VON BALTHASAR

"there neither has been nor can be any intrinsically great and historically fruitful theology which has not been conceived and born under the constellation of the kalon", the beautiful (GL I, p.10).

But for Balthasar, the fact that his project requires something of an apologia highlights how tenuous the relationship between theology and the beautiful has become, and that it seems to require justification suggests just how pervasive is the loss of this perspective (GL I, p. 9). In short, Balthasar sees his theological aesthetics as necessary precisely because it is no longer seen as necessary, and beauty (at least at the time of his writing) is considered something frivolous and superficial—especially with regard to theology.

And with Immanuel Kant likely in mind, Balthasar suggests that "beauty is the last thing which the thinking intellect dares to approach" (GL I, p. 18), recalling how Kant‘s great trilogy moves from epistemology (the True) through morality (the Good) before finally considering aesthetics (the Beautiful).

In other words, beauty has become something of a "lost transcendental" in that it has been superseded by an (over-) emphasis on the good and the true, and consequently its relationship to these two has undermined its status as a transcendental, transforming, de-forming it into "the Cinderella of the transcendentals". As a result, the role of beauty has been relegated to a kind of strict aestheticism (GL I, p.22), and lost its connection to goodness and truth, and ultimately to being itself. The consequences of this, for Balthasar, are serious: at a very fundamental level, this has obliterated the ancient notion of kalokagathia, beautiful goodness, and resulted in a crisis of meaning that is apparent everywhere, in a world that has been reduced to brute facticity where meaning is no longer found but projected. And in the absence of beauty, the modern experience of the world becomes fragmented, and truth, goodness and beauty come to operate independently of the other. In the particular case of beauty, beauty no longer possesses a transformative power, and is looked upon merely as something of an ornament, not something which, as Rilke observes in his "Archaic Torso of Apollo" compels us to "change our lives" (GL I, p. 23).

Balthasar‘s project is concerned with retrieving something of that vision of both God and the world, and The Glory of the Lord, then, can be appropriately considered an archeology of beauty in theology,as well as an attempt to articulate a theology of beauty.

Balthasar‘s theological aesthetics, then, has at its core a rather basic idea: beauty has meaning only with reference to God, and that the beauty of this world can only be understood in light of that context, and so on a very fundamental level “all great art is religious, an act of homage before the glory of what exists” (GL IV, pp.12-13). More specifically (as will be discussed later), Balthasar‘s theological aesthetics sees the beauty of God revealed — fully, definitively — in Jesus Christ, and that, therefore, all forms of worldly beauty are measured by God‘s self-disclosure in him. In other words, God‘s beauty is revealed through the incarnation of God in Jesus, and in that self-revelation God both validates and supersedes inner-worldly perceptions of beauty: i.e., God‘s self-revelation in Jesus changes what beauty has previously meant and what it can ever mean.

"[b]y assuming human nature God transformed the very meaning of culture. Henceforth all forms have to be measured by the supreme form of the Incarnation."

Rather, the beauty of Christ is to be understood as the self-revelation of God, and of God‘s love—an expression of "the glory of his inner-trinitarian life, which means God reveals his own internal unity-in-difference as three persons in one Godhead."

For Balthasar, this is similar to what one encounters in great works of art: these works, comprehensible only through themselves, alter and define the (art-)world-and ultimately "the greater a work of art, the more extensive the cultural sphere it dominates will be."

Balthasar‘s theology is accordingly aesthetic or, perhaps more accurately, "what is here called an ‗aesthetic‘ is therefore characterized as properly theological"—that is, "the
reception, perceived with the eyes of faith, of the self-interpreting glory of the sovereignly
free love of God."

we are, for Balthasar,"'enraptured' by our contemplation of these depths and are 'transported' to them" (GL I, p. 119).

The problem, for Balthasar, is a failure to appreciate the "scandal" of the incarnation, and instead to try to "filter and 'screen' the image of Christ so as more easily to accept that which is 'reasonable' and to reject what is not" (GL I, p. 513).

When God sends his own living Word to his creatures, he does so not to instruct them about the mysteries of the world, nor primarily to fulfill their deepest needs and yearnings. Rather he communicates and actively demonstrates such un-heard of things that man feels not satisfied but awestruck by a love which he could never have hoped to experience. For who would have dared describe God as love without having first received the revelation of the Trinity in the acceptance of the cross by the Son?

Revelation, in other words, is true on its own terms, a free-self expression, an absolute initiative of God — and quite independent of whether or how it corresponds to human understanding. The beauty of God's revelation in Christ "can never be determined in advance by a theological a priori, and appears as a phenomenon whose necessity is internal to itself, and thus a manifestation of freedom."

This means that a theological aesthetics, for Balthasar, cannot have its starting point in the subject, but rather in "attending to the way in which the wonderful diversity of created things speaks of the sheer creativity of Being and points us to a source of creativity and freedom beyond Being itself which is God."

A theological aesthetics, therefore, is a means of expressing the primacy of God‘s revelation over abstract theological systems and forms of natural theology that strive to "deduce" God‘s revelation; for Balthasar, a theological aesthetics does not look to get a secure place to stand, but rather attempts to get sight of what cannot be securely grasped.

In particular, Balthasar highlights three main themes that pass from the ancient world into Christian thought: (1) the procession of creatures from, and back to, God, (2) the desire for self-transcendence in God who is the supreme unity and beauty, and (3) the beauty of the
spiritual soul.

But, for Balthasar, this is true if and only if a person knows what love is—and that is precisely what a theological aesthetics intends to articulate.

In aesthetic perception it is impossible to reduce the appearing form to my own power of imagination. In both cases, "to understand" what
reveals itself does not mean to subsume it under master categories; neither love in the freedom of its grace nor the beautiful in its gratuitousness are things ―to be produced‖ [Rilke], least of all on the basis of a "need" on the part of the subject.

In other words, the experience of God‘s revelation in Jesus is not "beautiful" or "good" or "true" because it happens to satisfy human expectations, or fill up a "God-shaped hole" (as Balthasar believes it does for Rahner). Rather, God‘s revelation shatters those pre-conceptions, and shows its "ever greater inexhaustibility," echoing both Augustine and Anselm in saying, *si comprehendis non est Deus*: if you have grasped something, whatever it is you have got a hold of, it is not God. Balthasar therefore sees faith as fundamentally aesthetic, a kind of seeing or hearing, and not as an intellectual assent to abstract propositions. For Balthasar, to equate faith with intellectual assent amounts to fideism, in that it asks one to give assent to theoretical abstractions, where only the intellect is involved. By contrast, a theological aesthetics inspires transformation, conversion, action — ultimately, a Theo-Drama, where "getting a first glimpse of the form of Christ begins a process of enlightenment that adapts our powers to God‘s self-revelation", and moves us beyond ourselves.

The point, of course, is that the suffering in itself is ugly, disturbing, scandalous, but that, more to the point, it is intended to show how God shares in the suffering of humanity, and that the disfigured Jesus on the cross reveals precisely the depth of God‘s love. Christ‘s beauty, then, is in his suffering, in his willingness to be crucified by and for the world, and for Balthasar especially in his death and descent to Hell.

To be sure, as Balthasar points out, the Bible makes numerous statements about the glory of God, and highlights how that glory is revealed in, among other things, God's word, law, grace, redemption and ultimately the entire cosmos; the Bible, for Balthasar, is a revelation, or an index, of the universality of God's glory. But the universality of biblical glory must eventually confront the universality of the human spirit, "the spirit which of its nature is open to understand the being of all that is," seeking its "'transcendental‘, fundamental determination" (GL IV, p. 11). 

Balthasar begins his treatment of Plato by referencing a proverb Plato quotes five times in his works: "the beautiful is difficult" (GL IV, p. 166). According to Balthasar, Plato finds the beautiful difficult because his philosophical vision of the world is inclined toward a poetic, mythic vision that he is ultimately unable to accept: for while Plato‘s goal remains philosophical knowledge, he is nonetheless unable "to do as the moderns like and make a sharp distinction between 'scientific understanding' and 'mythical statement'" (GL IV, p. 181). Balthasar points to four areas in which Plato looks for truth that transcends the 'exact sciences': (1) his theory of recollection (bound up with his notions of the re-birth of the immortal soul), (2) his emphasis on eros, the role of the daimon and inspiration, (3) his use of explicit mythical statements, and (4) esotericism (GL IV, p. 181). Plato‘s philosophy, to the extent that it seeks a complete vision of things, is constantly pushed beyond itself, into the realm of myth, which it ultimately cannot admit since it is beyond its capacity to do so: "it must at once create myth as its own limit and yet critically take it back again" (GL IV, p. 195). Plato's use of myth — as, for example, the demiurge of the Timaeus or the eschatological visions of the Republic and the Phaedrus — are attempts to provide a complete reading of reality, and to venture where philosophy itself cannot go.

Philosophical knowledge, for Plato, does not simply mean knowing what a thing is (as it will for Aristotle in his fusion of form with matter), but also requires an awareness
that something "could not be recognized in its essence without 'participation' in the Absolute of Unity, Truth, Goodness, Beauty": no philosophy can exist without the ascent to the Idea (GL IV, pp. 179, 181).

this is particularly evident in Plato‘s treatment of beauty, perhaps most obviously in the Symposium, where the discussion moves from beautiful bodies, to beautiful souls, to beauty itself (GL IV, p. 202).

The inner measure, the measure of all things, for Plato is objective and "exists at every level of reality: gracefulness in the body, virtue in the soul and grandeur in the cosmos and the divine" (GL IV, p. 204).

