# Paul Tillich

"My claim is this: what until recently was the intention of theological ethics can only find fulfillment in a theology of culture, which is related not only to ethics but to every cultural function. ... Religion has the peculiar property of not belonging to any particular psychic function; neither the Hegelian conception of religion, which assigns it to the theoretical faculty, nor the Kantian conception, which assigns it to the practical faculty, nor the Schleiermacherian conception, which assigns it to feeling, have been able to be maintained. ... The religious principle is not one principle among others in the life of spirit. ... But religion is actual in every spiritual domain. ... Religion is the experience of the unconditioned. ..."[^1]

"What does the metaphor depth mean? It means that the religious aspect points to that which is ultimate, infinite, unconditional in man’s spiritual life. Religion, in the largest and most basic sense of the word, is ultimate concern. And ultimate concern is manifest in all creative functions of the human spirit. ... Religion is the substance; the ground, and the depth of man’s spiritual life. This is the religious aspect of the human spirit."[^2]

"Religion as ultimate concern is the meaning-giving substance of culture, and culture is the totality of forms in which the basic concern of religion express itself. In abbreviation: religion is the substance of culture, culture is the form of religion. Such a consideration definitely prevents the establishment of a dualism of religion and culture."[^3]

"It is now possible to state the law: the more form, the more autonomy; the more substance, the more theonomy. ... Any attempt to comprehend substance apart from form would be a reversion to the worst kind of heteronomy."[^4]

"Autonomy means the obedience of the individual to the law of reason, which he finds in himself as a rational being. The nomos (“law”) of autos (“self”) ... is the law implied in the logos structure of mind and reality. ... Heteronomy imposes a strange a strange (heteros) law (nomos) on one or all of the functions of reason. ... It represents ... the depth of reason. ... Theonomy does not mean the acceptance of a divine law imposed on reason by a highest authority; it means autonomous reason united with its own depth."[^5]

"The following system is an attempt to use the “method of correlation” as a way of uniting message and situation. It tries to correlate the questions implied in the situation with the answers implied in the message. It does not derive the answers from the questions as a self-defying apologetic theology does. Nor does it elaborate answers without relating them to the questions as a self-defying kerygmatic theology does. It correlates questions and answers, situation and message, human existence and divine manifestation."[^6]

"Gazing up at it [Sandro Botticelli’s Madonna], I felt a state approaching ecstasy. In the beauty of the painting there was Beauty itself. It shone through the colors of the paint as the light of day shines through the stained-glass windows of a medieval church. As I stood there, bathed in the beauty its painter had envisioned so long ago, something of the divine source of all things came through to me. I turned away shaken."[^7]

"Picasso’s “Guernica” is a great Protestant painting. Of course, this statement must be qualified by saying that it is not the Protestant answer, but rather the radicalism of the Protestant question which one can find in Picasso’s masterpiece. .... The question of man in a world of guilt, anxiety, and despair is put before us with tremendous power."[^8]

"Therefore, our theonomous interpretation of history had a slight tinge of romanticism, though it tried to avoid any kind of utopianism. ... While after the first World War the mood of a new beginning prevailed, after the second World War a mood of the end prevails. A present theology of culture is, above all, a theology of the end of culture .... Little is left in our present civilization which does not indicate to a sensitive mind the presence of this vacuum, this lack of ultimacy and substantial power in language and education, in politics and philosophy, in the development of personalities, and in the life of communities."[^9]

“The classical is something that resists historical criticism because its historical dominion, the binding power of the validity that is preserved and handed down, precedes all historical reflection and continues in it. ... The “classical” is something raised above the vicissitudes of changing times and changing tastes. ... Rather, when we call something classical, there is a consciousness of something enduring, of significance that cannot be lost and that is independent of all the circumstances of time – a kind of timeless present that is contemporaneous with every other present. So the most important thing about the concept of the classical ... is the normative sense.”(Truth and Method, 2nd edition, 287-288)

“Dogmatic acknowledgement of any tradition – and that means the acceptance of its claim to the truth – can, of course be equated with knowledge itself only if the tradition in question somehow guarantees freedom from constraint and from restriction in agreement about tradition itself. Gadamer’s argument presupposes that legitimating acknowledgement and the agreement in which authority is grounded are brought about without force. Experience with systematically distorted communication militates against that presupposition. .... Reason, as the principle of rational discourse, is the rock on which existing authorities split, not the one on which they were founded.”[^10]

"Every classic bears its own permanence and excess of meaning. But its permanence can quickly become excess. And that excess can sometimes yield to a radical instability of different receptions that defy any definitive interpretation."[^11]

"No classic text comes to us without the plural and ambiguous history of effects of its own production and all its former receptions. ... Plurality seems an adequate word to suggest the extraordinary variety that any study of language shows, and any study of the variety of receptions of any classic documents. Ambiguity may be too mild a word to describe the strange mixture of great good and frightening evil that our history reveals."[^12]

"The method of correlation does not sufficiently take into account the need for a critique of tradition. The critique I refer to is not simply a matter of criticizing the formulations of tradition in order that the underlying experience or affirmations of the tradition might more readily shine forth. Rather this critique is one that reexamines the experiences and affirmations themselves."[^13]

"Since all biblical texts are formulated in androcentric language and reflect patriarchal social structures, a feminist critical interpretation begins with a hermeneutics of suspicion rather than with a hermeneutics of consent and affirmation. It develops a hermeneutics of proclamation rather than a hermeneutics of historical factualness, because the Bible still functions as Holy Scripture in Christian communities today. Rather than reducing the liberating impulse of the Bible to a feminist principle or one feminist biblical tradition, it develops a hermeneutics of remembrance that moves from biblical texts about women to the reconstruction of women’s history. Finally, this model moves from a hermeneutics of disinterested distance to a hermeneutics of creative actualization that involves the church of women in the imaginative articulation of women’s biblical story and its ongoing history and community."[^14]

[^1]: Victor Nuovo, Visionary Science: A Translation of Tillich’s “On the Idea of a Theology of Culture” with an Interpretive Essay (Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1987), 23-24.
[^2]: Tillich, Theology of Culture (1959), 7-8.
[^3]: Tillich, Theology of Culture (1959), 42.
[^4]: Tillich, Main Works (1990), vol. 2, 75ff.; idem., What Is Religion? (1969), 164ff.; Nuovo, Visonary Science (1987), 26ff.
[^5]: Paul Tillich, Systematic Theology, vol. 1 (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1951), 84-85.
[^6]: Tillich, Systematic Theology, vol 1 (1951), 8.
[^7]: Paul Tillich, “One Moment of Beauty,” in On Art and Architecture (1987), 235.
[^8]: Tillich, Theology of Culture (1959), 68-69.
[^9]: Tillich, “Religion and Secular Culture,” in Main Works (1990), vol. 2, 202.
[^10]: Jürgen Habermas, “On Hermeneutics’ Claim to Universality,” in Mueller-Vollmer ed., The Hermeneutics Reader, 316.
[^11]: David Tracy, Plurality and Ambiguity: Hermeneutics, Religion, Hope (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 14.
[^12]: David Tracy, Plurality and Ambiguity: Hermeneutics, Religion, Hope (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), 69-70.
[^13]: Francis S. Fiorenza, “Systematic Theology: Task and Method,” in F. S. Fiorenza and J. P. Galvin eds, Systematic Theology: Roman Catholic Perspectives (Minneapolis: Fortress Press, 1991), 61.
[^14]: Elisaboth S. Fiorenza, Bread Not Stone (Boston: Beacon Press, 1995), 15.