# 神学求生指南

## 1. Who Need Theology Anyway?

Theo word theology is a compound of two Greek terms: theos, "God" and logos, "word, statement, discourse a line of argument."

The question therefore is not whether we will be theologians - we have no choice in the matter. Rather, the question is what kind of theologians we will be - good or bad, reponsible or irresponsible.

While it is true that theology alone may be lifeless, spiritual life without structure is at best ineffective and is for all practical purposes useless. The answer to the dilemma is to bring together the life with a structure that will support it.

While it is true that theology alone may be lifeless, spiritual life without structure is at best ineffective and is for all practical purposes useless. The answer to the dilemma is to bring together the life with a structure that will support it.

While theology is rightly seen as an intellectual activity that seeks to bring all things under the lordship of Christ and is rightly seen as an act of worship, it also involves interaction with our contemporary culture. In this sense, we might think of our theology as an armory that provides us with weapons to do battle with a world that is hostile to the lordship of Christ.

Our theological understanding comes from the Bible but not from the Bible alone. Many of the questions, categories, and thought forms that are incorporated in our understanding are drawn from the dominant philosophy of the culture we inhabit.

Rather than viewing our theology as propositions to be learned, we ought to view it as an act of worship. God has entrusted to us his divine revelation in all its multifaceted richness and fullness, but he has not given us a theology. He has revealed himself through his works and his words in human history, in his encounters with individuals at various times and places. He has revealed himself most fully in the person and work of Jesus Christ, but that revelation is in narrative, or story, form. Our job is to organize the material and bring it into a coherent whole so that we can more fully grasp who God is and what he has done. We offer back to him the fruit of our labor in understanding him and his work. The task of theology is to bring all things under the lordship of Christ. While we may rely on the work of others who have gone before us, we have a personal responsibility before God for our understanding.

## 2. The Theologian's Contradictory Job Description

Theologian to communicate the truth of God to the church of the next generation. Must be thoroughly versed in the Scriptures and unwaveringly committed to preserving “the faith once delivered to the saints.” Must have insatiable curiosity and the mind of a dedicated scientist. Must also have courage to follow the evidence toward truth wherever it leads no matter what the consequences. The successful candidate will recognize the culturally bound nature of human communication and be so fully immersed in cultural thought as to be able to boldly reshape his or her communication into the thought forms and language of the day.

Christianity is simple at its heart, but it is anything but simplistic.

Theology is most commonly understood as **sapientia**, **scientia**, or **orthopraxis**.

The aim of theology as sapientia, or wisdom, is pointing the believer to God in a relational fashion.

Medieval scholastics composed the great summas, theological works that were the summing up of all theological knowledge or, in some cases, the sum of all human knowledge.

More recently, with the rise of liberation theology, a new model of theology has emerged that sees orthopraxis, right action in the world rather than right doctrine, as the goal of the theological task.

The three aspects of the theologian’s job are guardian of truth, scientist, and contextualizer.

Christianity is founded on the conviction that truth exists and that God is its source and author. ... Scripture points to Jesus as the only way to enter into relationship with God (John 14:6), and it is the message of the redemption in Jesus that has been given to the church to proclaim. This is the faith “once for all entrusted to the saints.”

The Greek terminology encompasses both the cognitive (what we believe) and the personal (in whom we believe).

On the other hand, the verbal form pisteuo regularly carries the idea of personal trust, a trust that involves a disposition of the will.

His most important themes see faith as assent and faith as formed by love.

Luther’s teaching on faith has been called fiducia, “confidence.”

Luther clearly affirmed the dual nature of faith seen in the New Testament—both the cognitive aspect as well as the personal appropriation of the truth. Unbelief is not heresy, as it is in Thomas’s understanding, but rather a lack of trust. Luther recognized the propositional nature of faith, that it involves “right thinking about God.”9 That right thinking arises out of a grasp of the content of the gospel, the revelation of God.

- Knowledge 
- God’s goodwill as the object of the knowledge
- The grounds of that knowledge
- Inward means by which the knowledge is imparted

Faith rests not on ignorance, but on knowledge. And this is, indeed, knowledge not only of God but of the divine will. We do not obtain salvation either because we are prepared to embrace as true whatever the church has prescribed, or because we turn over to it the task of inquiring and knowing. But we do so when we know that God is our merciful Father, because of reconciliation effected through Christ [II Corinthians 5:18 – 19], and that Christ has been given to us as righteousness, sanctification, and life. By this knowledge, I say, not by submission of our feeling, do we obtain entry into the Kingdom of Heaven.[^12^]

Faith involves an intellectual element and an element of personal trust.

The growth of theological knowledge within the context of faith leads not to the danger of heresy, but to true maturity that more adequately grasps the proper object of faith and dethrones idolatrous misconceptions.

While a creed is a statement of belief, it is not an end in itself. It is a road map, a pointer to a greater reality, but too often the map becomes identified as the reality itself. Enforced subscription to a creed or doctrinal statement is sometimes substituted for vital faith in the God to whom the creed points.

The term heresy is derived from the Greek αίρεισθαι (haireisthai), to choose.[^20^] It does not imply a neutral choice; there is an underlying spiritual-moral factor. Neither heresy nor orthodoxy is simply an intellectual exercise; there is an inescapable heart factor. Anglican bishop Jeremy Taylor observed, “Heresy is not an error of the understanding but an error of the will.”[^21^] To this Samuel Taylor Coleridge added its converse, “Faith is not an accuracy of logic, but a rectitude of the heart.”[^22^]

The “Bible alone” mentality has often been accompanied by a naive biblicism that assumes that the text has a “plain meaning” and that denies, usually implicitly, that all reading of the biblical text involves interpretation.

The Christian’s appeal to the authority of Scripture is vital and foundational—but it cannot adequately stand in isolation from other factors.

We who live on this side of the councils of Nicea and Constantinople open the Bible and see the doctrine of the Trinity everywhere. But those who lived before those councils did not have the categories that allowed them to see what we take for granted.

As originally understood, apostolic succession referred not to the spiritual authority of the apostles being passed down, but to the apostolic doctrine being passed from generation to generation.

As the church grew and matured, it faced opposition from those who claimed to have “secret traditions” handed down from Jesus but not entrusted to the apostles.

“either the evidence to be found in the sacred Scriptures, or that to be discovered by the investigation of the logical consequences of the Scriptures and adherence to accuracy.”[^28^]

## 3. How Do We Know? Epistemology, History, and Truth

## 4. Sources and Authority in Theology

## 5. Doctrinal Taxonomy: Are All Doctrines of Equal Importance?

## 6. Hardening of the Categories: Why Theologians Have Opposed "New Knowledge"

## 7. The Divisions of Theological study

## 8. Orthodoxy

## 9. Roman Catholicism

## 10. Lutheranism

## 11. Reformed Theology (Calvinism)

## 12. Wesleyan-Arminian Theology

## 13. Dispensationalism

## 14. Liberalism

## 15. Neoorthodoxy

## 16. Liberation Theology

## 17. Biographical Sketches of Major Theologians and Philosophers

## 18. A Brief Dictionary of Theological and Philosophical Terms