# 使徒信经 Symbolum Apostolorum

Credo in Deum Patrem omnipotentem, Creatorem caeli et terrae.
我信上帝，全能的父，创造天地的主。

Et in Iesum Christum, Filium eius unicum, Dominum nostrum,
我信我主耶稣基督，上帝独生的子。

qui conceptus est de Spiritu Sancto, natus ex Maria Virgine,
因圣灵感孕，由童贞女马利亚所生；

passus sub Pontio Pilato, crucifixus, mortuus, et sepultus,
在本丢彼拉多手下受难，被钉于十字架上，受死，埋葬；

descendit ad inferos, tertia die resurrexit a mortuis,
降在阴间；第三天从死人中复活；

ascendit ad caelos, sedet ad dexteram Dei Patris omnipotentis,
升天，坐在全能父上帝的右边；

inde venturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos.
将来必从那里降临，审判活人死人。

Credo in Spiritum Sanctum,
我信圣灵。

sanctam Ecclesiam catholicam, sanctorum communionem,
我信圣而公之教会。我信圣徒相通。

remissionem peccatorum,
我信罪得赦免。

carnis resurrectionem
我信身体复活。

et vitam aeternam.
我信永生。

====
The title "Apostles' Creed", or *symbolum apostolorum*, which first occurs in a letter sent by the synod of Milan(390) to Pope Siricius and probably drafted by St Ambrose (he was one of its signatories), is symotomatic of an attitude which was general.[^1]

Serm. 240 (probably of the eighth century) in P.L. 39, 2189.

The first serious questionings of the edifying tale became audible at the council of Florence (1438-45), which attempted a reunion between the Churches of East and West.[^2]

As he stood in the water of the font, he was invited to assent to three successive questions whether he believed in the Father, in the Son and in the Holy Spirit. As he replied "I believe" to each of them, he was plunged in the water, three times in all, and his baptism was complete.[^3]

The directions given here provide for the renunciation of the devil ("I renounce thee, Satan, and all thy worship, thy shows, thy lusts and all thy works") and for the anointing of the candidate. He is then instructed to turn to the East and declare his adhesion to Father, Son and Holy Spirit. Then follows the description of the actual baptism:

Let the baptizands stand naked in the water. A deacon should step down in like manner into the water with the baptizand. Thus when the baptizand has stepped down into the water, the baptizer should place his hand upon him and say, "Dost thou believe in God the Father almighty?" and the baptizand should reply, "I believe". At once let him baptize him for the first time. Then the priest should say, "Dost thou believe also in Christ Jesus the Son of God, Who came from the Father, Who is with the Father from the beginning, Who was born from the Virgin Mary through the Holy Spirit, Who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, died, rose again on the third day reanimated from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of the Father, and will come to judge the living and the dead?" And when he answers, "I believe", let him baptize him a second timeThen he should say, "Dost thou believe also in the Holy Spirit, in the holy Church?" And the man who is being baptized should say, "I believe". Then let him baptize him a third time.[^4]

As regards the New Testament stage, there is no doubt that belief was considered the indispensable precondition of baptism from the earliest times. So much is clear from the essence of the rite as constituting admission to the Church. And to be assured of belief a profession of faith of one kind or another must have been demanded.[^5]

There is a well-known sentence in his treatise *De spectaculis* which points to the same conclusion: "When we entered the water and affirmed the Christian faith in answer to the words prescribed by its law (in legis suae verba profitemur), we testified with our lips that we had renounced the devil, his pomp and his angles."[^6]

The German scholar A. Seeberg was working along sound lines when he stated "The primitive Christian creeds are simply and solely the recapitulation, in a formula based upon the Trinitarian ground- plan, of the basic catechetical verities."[^7]

In modern times the most widely accepted interpretation of symbolum has been one which can be traced back to Rufinus. [^8]

The Apostles realized, he says, that there were Jews going about pretending to be apostles of Christ, and it was important to have some token by which the preacher who was armed with the authentic apostolic doctrine might be recognized. The situation was analogous, he says, to one which often arises in civil wars, when the rival partisans might easily make the most disastrous mistakes of identity were it not that the opposing commanders hand out distinguishing emblems, or passwords (*symbola distincta*), to their supporters: thus if there are doubts about anyone, he is asked for his token (*interrogatus symbolum*), and at once betrays whether he is friend or foe. This is the reason too, Rufinus goes on, why the creed is never written down, but is committed to memory and is thus maintained as the secret of apostolic churchmen.[^9]

St Augustine lent the weight of his authority to another, much more plausible explanation. The creed is called a symbol, he suggested, on the analogy of the pacts or agreements which businessmen enter into with one another. Symbolum, it should be noticed, was an ancient Latin borrowing, and in secular usage had meanings ranging from a signet-ring or the impress of a seal to a legal bond or warrant That the last mentioned was well to the fore in Christian times is proved by its occurrence in Tertullian St Augustine's derivation of the title of the creed thus harmonized with current linguistic usage, and it did not stand alone: it had the support of a whole school of writers both before and after his day.[^10]

With regard to Africans, forasmuch as they practice rebaptism according to their own regulations, it is decided that if anyone comes to the Church out of heresy, they should address to him the symbol questions (*interrogent eum symbolum*). If they perceive that he has been baptized in the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, it will only be necessary for a hand to be laid upon him so that he may receive the Holy Spirit. But if on being questioned he does not answer with this Trinity (*non responderit hanc Trinitatem*), he should be baptized.[^11]

It should never be forgotten that the primary idea which *symbolum*, in its Latin as well as its Greek form, conveyed was that of a sign, a token, a symbol: it stood for anything by which one was reminded of something else.[^12]

The Church, though dispersed through our the whole world, even to the ends of the earth, has received from the apostles and their disciples this faith: [She believes] in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven, and earth, and the sea, and all things that are in them; and in one Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who became incarnate for our salvation; and in the Holy Spirit, who proclaimed through the prophets the dispensations of God, and the advents, and the birth from a virgin, and the passion, and the resurrection from the dead, and the ascension into heaven in the flesh of the beloved Christ Jesus, our Lord, and His [future] manifestation from heaven in the glory of the Father to gather all things in one, Ephesians 1:10 and to raise up anew all flesh of the whole human race, in order that to Christ Jesus, our Lord, and God, and Saviour, and King, according to the will of the invisible Father, every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess Philippians 2:10-11 to Him, and that He should execute just judgment towards all; that He may send spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians 6:12 and the angels who transgressed and became apostates, together with the ungodly, and unrighteous, and wicked, and profane among men, into everlasting fire; but may, in the exercise of His grace, confer immortality on the righteous, and holy, and those who have kept His commandments, and have persevered in His love, some from the beginning [of their Christian course] [^20]



[^1]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 1.
[^2]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 4.
[^3]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 32.
[^4]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 35.
[^5]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 41.
[^6]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 44-45.
[^7]: Der Katechismus der Urchristenheit, Leipzig, 1903, 271. as cited in J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 50.
[^8]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 53.
[^9]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 54.
[^10]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 55.
[^11]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 57.
[^12]: J. N. D. Kelly, Early christian Creed, 3rd. (New York: Longman, 1972), 59.

[^20]: Irenaeus. <Against Heresies> Book I, Chapter 10.