# Feminist Theology

“ “Father-Mother God, loving me, guard me while I sleep, guide my little feet up to thee.” This prayer, which theologian Herbert Richardson reports reciting as a child, impressed upon his young mind that if God is both father and mother, then God is not like anything else he knew. … If we use only the male pronoun, we fall into idolatry, forgetting that God is beyond male and female – a fact that the use of both pronouns brings home to us as the opening prayer to “Father-Mother God” illustrated. If we refuse to use any pronouns for God, we court the possibility of concealing androcentric assumptions behind abstractions. If we are, then, to be concrete, personal, and nonidolatrous in our talk about God, we have no alternative but to speak of God in female as well as male terms, to use “she” as well as “he,” and to realize that in so doing we are not attributing passive and nurturing qualities to God any more than we are attributing active and powerful qualities. Or to say it differently, we are attributing human qualities: we are imagining God on analogy with human beings, and so far that is all that we are doing: God is she and he and neither.”[^1^]

“Feminist studies therefore maintains that established scholarship as androcentric scholarship is not only partial, to the extent that it articulates male experience as human experience, but also biased, to the extent that its intellectual discourse and scholarly frameworks are determined only by male perspectives primarily of the dominant classes. This feminist claim runs counter to the assertion of traditional historical-critical biblical scholarship that prides itself on being impartial, objective, and value-neutral. Recognizing its sociopolitical location and public commitment, a feminist biblical interpretation must therefore utilize historical-critical methods for the sake of presenting an alternative interpretation of biblical texts and history for public scholarly discussion and historical assessment. In order to do so, we must develop a hermeneutics of suspicion to be applied both to the contemporary scholarly historical discourse and to that of the biblical writers.”[^2^]

“Texts and historical sources – Jewish as well as Christian – must be read as androcentric texts. As such they are reflective of the experience, opinion, or control of the individual male writer but not of women’s historical reality and experience. Such isolated statements should not be construed as the negative and positive tradition about women in Judaism. …  
The glorification as well as the denigration or marginalization of women in Jewish texts is to be understood as a social construction of reality in patriarchal terms or as a projection of male reality. … It must, however, not be overlooked that “intellectuals” who often belonged to the middle class were responsible for these literary expressions.  
The formal canons of codified patriarchal law are generally more restrictive than the actual interaction and relationship of women and men and the social reality which they govern. Although in rabbinic Judaism women are categorized with children and slaves for legal religious purposes, the biblical stories about women indicate that women were not perceived as minors or slaves in everyday life. …  
Women’s actual social-religious status must be determined by the degree of their economic autonomy and social roles rather than by ideological or prescriptivestatements.”[^3^]

“[T]he canonization process of early Christian writings has preserved both the patriarchalizing texts of the New Testament and the early Christian traditions or texts that permit a glimpse of the egalitarian-inclusive practice and theology of early Christians. These texts are like the tipof an iceberg, indicating a rich heritage now lost to us. … What is necessary is a systemic interpretation and historical reconstruction that can make the submerged bulk of the iceberg “visible.” …. This androcentric selection and transmission of early Christian traditions seems to have engendered the historical marginality of women. New Testament texts are not an accurate reflection of the historicalreality of women’s leadership and participation in the early Christian movement. …  
If the “silences” about women’s historical experience … are produced by androcentric language, texts, and historical models of reconstruction, then we must find ways to “break” the silences of the texts. … This feminist critical method could be likened to historical-theological “detective” work in that it does not rely on the obvious “facts” or “invent” its evidence, but is engaged in an imaginative reconstruction of historical reality.”[^4^]


[^1^]: Sallie McFague,“God as Mother,” in Judith Plaskow and Carol P. Christ eds., Weaving the Visions (San Francisco:Harper &Row, 1989), 139, 141.
[^2^]: ElisabethSchussler Fiorenza, Bread Not Stone (Boston: Beacon, 1995), 107-8.
[^3^]: Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza, In Memory of Her: A Feminist Theological Reconstruction of ChristianOrigins (New York: Crossroad, 1995), 108-109.
[^4^]: Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza, Bread Not Stone (Boston: Beacon, 1995), 111-113.